content/blog/debugging-in-common-lisp.md, before:

---
title: "Debugging in Common Lisp"
date: 2018-12-20T12:26:02+01:00
tags: ["tutorial", "debugging",]
draft: false
---


You entered this new world of Lisp and now wonder: how can we debug
what's going on ?  How is it more interactive than in other platforms
?  What does bring the interactive debugger appart from stacktraces ?

_note_: this tutorial is available on the [Common Lisp Cookbook](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/debugging.html) and it will receive updates there.

If you want step-by-step examples of interactive debugging with nice
screenshots and gifs, see the blog posts in the References section
below.


<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-generate-toc again -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Print debugging](#print-debugging)
- [Logging](#logging)
- [Using the powerful REPL](#using-the-powerful-repl)
- [Inspect and describe](#inspect-and-describe)
- [The interactive debugger](#the-interactive-debugger)
- [Trace](#trace)
    - [Tracing method invocation](#tracing-method-invocation)
- [Step](#step)
- [Break](#break)
    - [Breakpoints in Slime](#breakpoints-in-slime)
- [Advise and watch](#advise-and-watch)
- [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
- [References](#references)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->


## Print debugging

Well of course we can use the famous technique of "print
debugging". Let's just recap a few print functions.

`print` works, it prints a READable representation of its argument,
which means what is `print`ed can be `read` back in by the Lisp
reader.

`princ` focuses on an *aesthetic* representation.

`format t "~a" …)`, with the *aesthetic* directive, prints a string (in `t`, the standard output
stream) and returns nil, whereas `format nil …` doesn't print anything
and returns a string. With many format controls we can print several
variables at once.

## Logging

Logging is a good evolution from print debugging ;)

[log4cl](https://github.com/sharplispers/log4cl/) is the popular,
de-facto logging library but it isn't the only one. Download it:

    (ql:quickload :log4cl)

and let's have a dummy variable:

    (defvar *foo* '(:a :b :c))

We can use log4cl with its `log` nickname, then it is as simple to use as:

~~~lisp
(log:info *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:36:49] cl-user () - *FOO*: (:A :B :C)
~~~

We can interleave strings and expressions, with or without `format`
control strings:

~~~lisp
(log:info "foo is " *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:37:22] cl-user () - foo is *FOO*: (:A :B :C)
(log:info "foo is ~{~a~}" *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:39:05] cl-user () - foo is ABC
~~~

With its companion library `log4slime`, we can interactively change
the log level:

- globally,
- per package,
- per function,
- and by CLOS methods and CLOS hierarchy (before and after methods).

It is very handy, when we have a lot of output, to turn off the
logging of functions or packages we know to work, and thus narrowing
our search to the right area. We can even save this configuration and
re-use it in another image, be it on another machine.

We can do all this through commands, keyboard shortcuts and also through a
menu or mouse clicks.

!["changing the log level with log4slime"](https://github.com/sharplispers/log4cl/raw/master/images/screenshot-15.png)

We invite you to read log4cl's readme.

## Using the powerful REPL

Part of the joy of Lisp is the excellent REPL. Its existence usually
delays the need to use other debugging tools, if it doesn't annihilate
them for the usual routine.

As soon as we define a function, we can try it in the REPL. In Slime,
compile a function with `C-c C-c` (the whole buffer with `C-c C-k`),
switch to the REPL with `C-c C-z` and try it. Eventually enter the
package you are working on with `(in-package :your-package)`.

The feedback is immediate. There is no need to recompile everything,
nor to restart any process, nor to create a main function and define
command line arguments for use in the shell (we can do this later on
when needed).

We usually need to create some data to test our function(s). This is a
subsequent art of the REPL existence and it may be a new discipline
for newcomers. A trick is to write the test data alongside your
functions but inside a `#+nil` declaration so that only you can
manually compile them:

~~~lisp
    #+nil
    (progn
       (defvar *test-data* nil)
       (setf *test-data* (make-instance 'foo …)))
~~~

When you load this file, `*test-data*` won't exist, but you can
manually create it with a `C-c C-c` away.

We can define tests functions like this.

Some do similarly inside `#| … |#` comments.

All that being said, keep in mind to write unit tests when time comes ;)


## Inspect and describe

These two commands share the same goal, printing a description of an
object, `inspect` being the interactive one.

~~~
(inspect *foo*)

The object is a proper list of length 3.
0. 0: :A
1. 1: :B

2. 2: :C
> q
~~~

We can also, in editors that support it, right-click on any object in
the REPL and `inspect` them. We are presented a screen where we can
dive deep inside the data structure and even change it.

Let's have a quick look with a more interesting structure, an object:

~~~lisp
(defclass foo ()
    ((a :accessor foo-a :initform '(:a :b :c))
     (b :accessor foo-b :initform :b)))
;; #<STANDARD-CLASS FOO>
(make-instance 'foo)
;; #<FOO {100F2B6183}>
~~~

We right-click on the `#<FOO` object and choose "inspect". We are
presented an interactive pane (in Slime):

```
#<FOO {100F2B6183}>
--------------------
Class: #<STANDARD-CLASS FOO>
--------------------
 Group slots by inheritance [ ]
 Sort slots alphabetically  [X]

All Slots:
[ ]  A = (:A :B :C)
[ ]  B = :B

[set value]  [make unbound]
```

When we click or press enter on the line of slot A, we inspect it further:

```
#<CONS {100F5E2A07}>
--------------------
A proper list:
0: :A
1: :B
2: :C
```

## The interactive debugger

Whenever an exceptional situation happens (see
[error handling](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/error_handling.html)), the interactive debugger pops
up.

It presents the error message, available actions (*restarts*),
and the backtrace. A few remarks:

- the restarts are programmable, we can create our owns,
- in Slime, press `v` on a stacktrace to be redirected to the source
  file at the right line,
- hit enter on a frame for more details,
- we can explore the functionnality with the menu that should appear
  in our editor. See below in "break" section for a few
  more commands (eval in frame, etc).

Usually your compiler will optimize things out and this will reduce
the amount of information available to the debugger. For example
sometimes we can't see intermediate variables of computations. We can
change the optimization choices with:

    (declaim (optimize (speed 0) (space 0) (debug 3)))

and recompile our code.


## Trace

[trace](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=trace) allows us to see when a
function was called, what arguments it received, and the value it
returned.

~~~lisp
(defun factorial (n)
  (if (plusp n)
    (* n (factorial (1- n)))
    1))
~~~

~~~lisp
(trace factorial)

(factorial 2)
  0: (FACTORIAL 3)
    1: (FACTORIAL 2)
      2: (FACTORIAL 1)
        3: (FACTORIAL 0)
        3: FACTORIAL returned 1
      2: FACTORIAL returned 1
    1: FACTORIAL returned 2
  0: FACTORIAL returned 6
6

(untrace factorial)
~~~

To untrace all functions, just evaluate `(untrace)`.

In Slime we also have the shortcut `C-c M-t` to trace or untrace a
function.

If you don't see recursive calls, that may be because of the
compiler's optimizations. Try this before defining the function to be
traced:

    (declaim (optimize (debug 3)))

The output is printed to `*trace-output*` (see the CLHS).

In Slime, we also have an interactive trace dialog with ``M-x
slime-trace-dialog`` bound to `C-c T`.


### Tracing method invocation

In SBCL, we can use `(trace foo :methods t)` to trace the execution order of method combination (before, after, around methods). For example:

~~~lisp
(trace foo :methods t)

(foo 2.0d0)
  0: (FOO 2.0d0)
    1: ((SB-PCL::COMBINED-METHOD FOO) 2.0d0)
      2: ((METHOD FOO (FLOAT)) 2.0d0)
        3: ((METHOD FOO (T)) 2.0d0)
        3: (METHOD FOO (T)) returned 3
      2: (METHOD FOO (FLOAT)) returned 9
      2: ((METHOD FOO :AFTER (DOUBLE-FLOAT)) 2.0d0)
      2: (METHOD FOO :AFTER (DOUBLE-FLOAT)) returned DOUBLE
    1: (SB-PCL::COMBINED-METHOD FOO) returned 9
  0: FOO returned 9
9
~~~

See the [CLOS](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/clos.html) section for a tad more information.

## Step

[step](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=step) is an interactive command with
similar scope than `trace`. This:

    (step (factorial 2))

gives an interactive pane with the available restarts:

```
Evaluating call:
  (FACTORIAL 2)
With arguments:
  2
   [Condition of type SB-EXT:STEP-FORM-CONDITION]

Restarts:
 0: [STEP-CONTINUE] Resume normal execution
 1: [STEP-OUT] Resume stepping after returning from this function
 2: [STEP-NEXT] Step over call
 3: [STEP-INTO] Step into call
 4: [RETRY] Retry SLIME REPL evaluation request.
 5: [*ABORT] Return to SLIME's top level.
 --more--

Backtrace:
  0: ((LAMBDA ()))
  1: (SB-INT:SIMPLE-EVAL-IN-LEXENV (LET ((SB-IMPL::*STEP-OUT* :MAYBE)) (UNWIND-PROTECT (SB-IMPL::WITH-STEPPING-ENABLED #))) #S(SB-KERNEL:LEXENV :FUNS NIL :VARS NIL :BLOCKS NIL :TAGS NIL :TYPE-RESTRICTIONS ..
  2: (SB-INT:SIMPLE-EVAL-IN-LEXENV (STEP (FACTORIAL 2)) #<NULL-LEXENV>)
  3: (EVAL (STEP (FACTORIAL 2)))
```

Stepping is useful, however it may be a sign that you need to simplify your function.

## Break

A call to [break](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=break) makes the program
enter the debugger, from which we can inspect the call stack.


### Breakpoints in Slime

Look at the `SLDB` menu, it shows navigation keys and available
actions. Of which:

- `e` (*sldb-eval-in-frame*) prompts for an expression and evaluates
  it in the selected frame. This is how we can explore our
  intermediate variables.
- `d` is similar with the addition of pretty printing the result.

Once we are in a frame and detect a suspicious behavior, we can even
re-compile a function at runtime and resume the program execution from
where it stopped (using the "step-continue" restart).


## Advise and watch

[advise](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=break) and
[watch](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=watch) are available in some vendor
implementations, like LispWorks. They are not available in
SBCL. `advise` allows to modify a function without changing its
source, or to do something before or after its execution, like CLOS'
method combination (befor, after around methods).

`watch` allows to specify variables to be displayed in some GUI during
the program execution.


## Unit tests

Last but not least, automatic testing of functions in isolation might
be what you're looking for ! See the [testing](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/testing.html) section and a list of
[test frameworks and libraries](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#unit-testing).


## References

- ["How to understand and use Common Lisp"](https://successful-lisp.blogspot.com/p/httpsdrive.html), chap. 30, David Lamkins (book download from author's site)
- [Malisper: debugging Lisp series](https://malisper.me/debugging-lisp-part-1-recompilation/)
- [Two Wrongs: debugging Common Lisp in Slime](https://two-wrongs.com/debugging-common-lisp-in-slime.html)

Commit message:

update: debugging: better how to use "declare" to print variables with eval-in-frame

content/blog/debugging-in-common-lisp.md, after:

---
title: "Debugging in Common Lisp"
date: 2018-12-20T12:26:02+01:00
tags: ["tutorial", "debugging",]
draft: false
---


You entered this new world of Lisp and now wonder: how can we debug
what's going on ?  How is it more interactive than in other platforms
?  What does bring the interactive debugger appart from stacktraces ?

_note_: this tutorial is available on the [Common Lisp Cookbook](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/debugging.html) and it will receive updates there.

If you want step-by-step examples of interactive debugging with nice
screenshots and gifs, see the blog posts in the References section
below.


<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-generate-toc again -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Print debugging](#print-debugging)
- [Logging](#logging)
- [Using the powerful REPL](#using-the-powerful-repl)
- [Inspect and describe](#inspect-and-describe)
- [The interactive debugger](#the-interactive-debugger)
- [Trace](#trace)
    - [Tracing method invocation](#tracing-method-invocation)
- [Step](#step)
- [Break](#break)
    - [Breakpoints in Slime](#breakpoints-in-slime)
- [Advise and watch](#advise-and-watch)
- [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
- [References](#references)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->


## Print debugging

Well of course we can use the famous technique of "print
debugging". Let's just recap a few print functions.

`print` works, it prints a READable representation of its argument,
which means what is `print`ed can be `read` back in by the Lisp
reader.

`princ` focuses on an *aesthetic* representation.

`format t "~a" …)`, with the *aesthetic* directive, prints a string (in `t`, the standard output
stream) and returns nil, whereas `format nil …` doesn't print anything
and returns a string. With many format controls we can print several
variables at once.

## Logging

Logging is a good evolution from print debugging ;)

[log4cl](https://github.com/sharplispers/log4cl/) is the popular,
de-facto logging library but it isn't the only one. Download it:

    (ql:quickload :log4cl)

and let's have a dummy variable:

    (defvar *foo* '(:a :b :c))

We can use log4cl with its `log` nickname, then it is as simple to use as:

~~~lisp
(log:info *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:36:49] cl-user () - *FOO*: (:A :B :C)
~~~

We can interleave strings and expressions, with or without `format`
control strings:

~~~lisp
(log:info "foo is " *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:37:22] cl-user () - foo is *FOO*: (:A :B :C)
(log:info "foo is ~{~a~}" *foo*)
;; <INFO> [13:39:05] cl-user () - foo is ABC
~~~

With its companion library `log4slime`, we can interactively change
the log level:

- globally,
- per package,
- per function,
- and by CLOS methods and CLOS hierarchy (before and after methods).

It is very handy, when we have a lot of output, to turn off the
logging of functions or packages we know to work, and thus narrowing
our search to the right area. We can even save this configuration and
re-use it in another image, be it on another machine.

We can do all this through commands, keyboard shortcuts and also through a
menu or mouse clicks.

!["changing the log level with log4slime"](https://github.com/sharplispers/log4cl/raw/master/images/screenshot-15.png)

We invite you to read log4cl's readme.

## Using the powerful REPL

Part of the joy of Lisp is the excellent REPL. Its existence usually
delays the need to use other debugging tools, if it doesn't annihilate
them for the usual routine.

As soon as we define a function, we can try it in the REPL. In Slime,
compile a function with `C-c C-c` (the whole buffer with `C-c C-k`),
switch to the REPL with `C-c C-z` and try it. Eventually enter the
package you are working on with `(in-package :your-package)`.

The feedback is immediate. There is no need to recompile everything,
nor to restart any process, nor to create a main function and define
command line arguments for use in the shell (we can do this later on
when needed).

We usually need to create some data to test our function(s). This is a
subsequent art of the REPL existence and it may be a new discipline
for newcomers. A trick is to write the test data alongside your
functions but inside a `#+nil` declaration so that only you can
manually compile them:

~~~lisp
    #+nil
    (progn
       (defvar *test-data* nil)
       (setf *test-data* (make-instance 'foo …)))
~~~

When you load this file, `*test-data*` won't exist, but you can
manually create it with a `C-c C-c` away.

We can define tests functions like this.

Some do similarly inside `#| … |#` comments.

All that being said, keep in mind to write unit tests when time comes ;)


## Inspect and describe

These two commands share the same goal, printing a description of an
object, `inspect` being the interactive one.

~~~
(inspect *foo*)

The object is a proper list of length 3.
0. 0: :A
1. 1: :B

2. 2: :C
> q
~~~

We can also, in editors that support it, right-click on any object in
the REPL and `inspect` them. We are presented a screen where we can
dive deep inside the data structure and even change it.

Let's have a quick look with a more interesting structure, an object:

~~~lisp
(defclass foo ()
    ((a :accessor foo-a :initform '(:a :b :c))
     (b :accessor foo-b :initform :b)))
;; #<STANDARD-CLASS FOO>
(make-instance 'foo)
;; #<FOO {100F2B6183}>
~~~

We right-click on the `#<FOO` object and choose "inspect". We are
presented an interactive pane (in Slime):

```
#<FOO {100F2B6183}>
--------------------
Class: #<STANDARD-CLASS FOO>
--------------------
 Group slots by inheritance [ ]
 Sort slots alphabetically  [X]

All Slots:
[ ]  A = (:A :B :C)
[ ]  B = :B

[set value]  [make unbound]
```

When we click or press enter on the line of slot A, we inspect it further:

```
#<CONS {100F5E2A07}>
--------------------
A proper list:
0: :A
1: :B
2: :C
```

## The interactive debugger

Whenever an exceptional situation happens (see
[error handling](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/error_handling.html)), the interactive debugger pops
up.

It presents the error message, available actions (*restarts*),
and the backtrace. A few remarks:

- the restarts are programmable, we can create our owns,
- in Slime, press `v` on a stacktrace to be redirected to the source
  file at the right line,
- hit enter on a frame for more details,
- we can explore the functionnality with the menu that should appear
  in our editor. See below in "break" section for a few
  more commands (eval in frame, etc).

Usually your compiler will optimize things out and this will reduce
the amount of information available to the debugger. For example
sometimes we can't see intermediate variables of computations. You might
want to print a function argument (with `e` to "eval in frame", see
below), but you keep getting a `Variable XYZ is unbound` error.

To fix this, we have to change the optimization choices with `declaim`, at the beginning of the file:

    (declaim (optimize (speed 0) (space 0) (debug 3)))

or with `declare`, inside a `defun`:

```lisp
(defun my-fun (xyz)
  (declare (optimize (debug 3)))
  …)
```

and recompile the code. Now you should be able to see local variables such as`xyz`.


## Trace

[trace](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=trace) allows us to see when a
function was called, what arguments it received, and the value it
returned.

~~~lisp
(defun factorial (n)
  (if (plusp n)
    (* n (factorial (1- n)))
    1))
~~~

~~~lisp
(trace factorial)

(factorial 2)
  0: (FACTORIAL 3)
    1: (FACTORIAL 2)
      2: (FACTORIAL 1)
        3: (FACTORIAL 0)
        3: FACTORIAL returned 1
      2: FACTORIAL returned 1
    1: FACTORIAL returned 2
  0: FACTORIAL returned 6
6

(untrace factorial)
~~~

To untrace all functions, just evaluate `(untrace)`.

In Slime we also have the shortcut `C-c M-t` to trace or untrace a
function.

If you don't see recursive calls, that may be because of the
compiler's optimizations. Try this before defining the function to be
traced:

    (declaim (optimize (debug 3)))

The output is printed to `*trace-output*` (see the CLHS).

In Slime, we also have an interactive trace dialog with ``M-x
slime-trace-dialog`` bound to `C-c T`.


### Tracing method invocation

In SBCL, we can use `(trace foo :methods t)` to trace the execution order of method combination (before, after, around methods). For example:

~~~lisp
(trace foo :methods t)

(foo 2.0d0)
  0: (FOO 2.0d0)
    1: ((SB-PCL::COMBINED-METHOD FOO) 2.0d0)
      2: ((METHOD FOO (FLOAT)) 2.0d0)
        3: ((METHOD FOO (T)) 2.0d0)
        3: (METHOD FOO (T)) returned 3
      2: (METHOD FOO (FLOAT)) returned 9
      2: ((METHOD FOO :AFTER (DOUBLE-FLOAT)) 2.0d0)
      2: (METHOD FOO :AFTER (DOUBLE-FLOAT)) returned DOUBLE
    1: (SB-PCL::COMBINED-METHOD FOO) returned 9
  0: FOO returned 9
9
~~~

See the [CLOS](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/clos.html) section for a tad more information.

## Step

[step](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=step) is an interactive command with
similar scope than `trace`. This:

    (step (factorial 2))

gives an interactive pane with the available restarts:

```
Evaluating call:
  (FACTORIAL 2)
With arguments:
  2
   [Condition of type SB-EXT:STEP-FORM-CONDITION]

Restarts:
 0: [STEP-CONTINUE] Resume normal execution
 1: [STEP-OUT] Resume stepping after returning from this function
 2: [STEP-NEXT] Step over call
 3: [STEP-INTO] Step into call
 4: [RETRY] Retry SLIME REPL evaluation request.
 5: [*ABORT] Return to SLIME's top level.
 --more--

Backtrace:
  0: ((LAMBDA ()))
  1: (SB-INT:SIMPLE-EVAL-IN-LEXENV (LET ((SB-IMPL::*STEP-OUT* :MAYBE)) (UNWIND-PROTECT (SB-IMPL::WITH-STEPPING-ENABLED #))) #S(SB-KERNEL:LEXENV :FUNS NIL :VARS NIL :BLOCKS NIL :TAGS NIL :TYPE-RESTRICTIONS ..
  2: (SB-INT:SIMPLE-EVAL-IN-LEXENV (STEP (FACTORIAL 2)) #<NULL-LEXENV>)
  3: (EVAL (STEP (FACTORIAL 2)))
```

Stepping is useful, however it may be a sign that you need to simplify your function.

## Break

A call to [break](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=break) makes the program
enter the debugger, from which we can inspect the call stack.


### Breakpoints in Slime

Look at the `SLDB` menu, it shows navigation keys and available
actions. Of which:

- `e` (*sldb-eval-in-frame*) prompts for an expression and evaluates
  it in the selected frame. This is how we can explore our
  intermediate variables.
- `d` is similar with the addition of pretty printing the result.

Once we are in a frame and detect a suspicious behavior, we can even
re-compile a function at runtime and resume the program execution from
where it stopped (using the "step-continue" restart).


## Advise and watch

[advise](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=break) and
[watch](http://www.xach.com/clhs?q=watch) are available in some vendor
implementations, like LispWorks. They are not available in
SBCL. `advise` allows to modify a function without changing its
source, or to do something before or after its execution, like CLOS'
method combination (befor, after around methods).

`watch` allows to specify variables to be displayed in some GUI during
the program execution.


## Unit tests

Last but not least, automatic testing of functions in isolation might
be what you're looking for ! See the [testing](https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/testing.html) section and a list of
[test frameworks and libraries](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#unit-testing).


## References

- ["How to understand and use Common Lisp"](https://successful-lisp.blogspot.com/p/httpsdrive.html), chap. 30, David Lamkins (book download from author's site)
- [Malisper: debugging Lisp series](https://malisper.me/debugging-lisp-part-1-recompilation/)
- [Two Wrongs: debugging Common Lisp in Slime](https://two-wrongs.com/debugging-common-lisp-in-slime.html)
