content/blog/overview-of-documentation-generators.md, before:

---
title: "Overview of Documentation Generators"
date: 2018-11-07T18:34:11+01:00
draft: false
---

I have a simple need: I'd like to generate an html documentation from
my code. What options do we have ?

I searched for "documentation tool" on Quickdocs:
http://quickdocs.org/search?q=documentation%20tool, from which I
remove old ones (clod, qbook, manifest).

I had two pure Lisp solutions working out of the box, two more are of
interest, and there's another non-Lisp of interest.


## Codex

Codex produces nice html but isn't automatic.

- https://github.com/CommonDoc/codex (by @eudoxia)
- example: https://commondoc.github.io/codex/docs/tutorial.html
- input fromat: [scriba](http://commondoc.github.io/scriba/docs/reference.html) by default. No more format it seems.
- output: multiple html files.
- rendering: modern, colored, light, TOC on the side
- granularity: good
- link to CLHS: yes
- totally automatic: no (one needs to create the documentation structure in `manual.lisp`, AFAIU).
- used in the wild: yes

Getting started: write a simple `docs/manifest.lisp` and `docs/manual.lisp`.

Am I mistaking ? It's exclusively manual. We must supply every
function/generic function/method/class/macro to document in
`manual.lisp`.


## Coo

Coo is a new tool in town, it works out of the box and it is actively developed !

- https://github.com/fisxoj/coo
- https://fisxoj.github.io/coo/
- input: docstrings in `rst`
- output: multiple html
- rendering: black & white, no TOC (active development)
- links to CLHS: yes, since yesterday :)
- granularity: doesn't show class slots, doesn't show generic functions.
- used in the wild: coo no, more probably cl-docutils.

Based on [cl-docutils](https://github.com/willijar/cl-docutils).

Displays the functions' documentation following their order in source (or not ? I saw exceptions).

It's straightforward:

    (coo:document-system :my-system)

and it produces html into `docs/`.


## Staple (doesn't work on Debian's SBCL 1.2.4)

You may be familiar with Staple since it's used by Shinmera in all his projects.

- https://github.com/Shinmera/staple
- output: a single html. The documentation string is plain text (no markup, rendered in a `<pre>` tag).
- can use a template.

It doesn't support SBCL 1.2.4, so my tests fell short (upgrading isn't
100% smooth here). If you're on SBCL >= 1.4.8 Staple is a good option.

## Declt

Declt has higher goals than "quick and easy" documentation generator.

- https://github.com/didierverna/declt
- https://www.lrde.epita.fr/~didier/software/lisp/declt/
- output: a `.texi` file, that we can render into other formats (html, pdf).
- cross-references: yes

It didn't work out of the box (and had no explicit error information)
and it's also too involved for my use case.

## Documentation-tool (not for general use)

It's the template used for Edi Weitz software, like Hunchentoot.

- https://edicl.github.io/documentation-template/
- output: one html file

It works, but it thinks you publish an edicl software and has some hardcoded "http://weitz.de/files/…" urls.


## Tinaa (unmaintained)

I liked the output, but it didn't work (asdf-related error), and it's unmaintained (authors' words).

- https://github.com/gwkkwg/tinaa
- https://common-lisp.net/project/tinaa/documentation/index.html
- output: html


## See also

### cl-domain (Sphinx)

Another excellent option is 40ants' cldomain, which builds on Python's proven Sphinx:

> CLDomain is an extension for the Sphinx documentation generation tool that allow sphinx to generate documentation for Common Lisp libraries. Documentation is extracted from the various entity’s documentation strings, loaded from ASDF systems and associated internal packages.

They use it for they new projects since around 3 years now.

- https://github.com/40ants/cldomain
- http://40ants.com/cldomain/
- input: rst
- output: many html
- HyperSpec links: yes
- requirements: Python, pip


---

I'll use and watch Coo !

Commit message:

staple: not just single html, xref, disclaimer: more features

content/blog/overview-of-documentation-generators.md, after:

---
title: "Overview of Documentation Generators"
date: 2018-11-07T18:34:11+01:00
draft: false
---

I have a simple need: I'd like to generate an html documentation from
my code. What options do we have ?

I searched for "documentation tool" on Quickdocs:
http://quickdocs.org/search?q=documentation%20tool, from which I
remove old ones (clod, qbook, manifest).

I had two pure Lisp solutions working out of the box, two more are of
interest, and there's another non-Lisp of interest.


## Codex

Codex produces nice html but isn't automatic.

- https://github.com/CommonDoc/codex (by @eudoxia)
- example: https://commondoc.github.io/codex/docs/tutorial.html
- input fromat: [scriba](http://commondoc.github.io/scriba/docs/reference.html) by default. No more format it seems.
- output: multiple html files.
- rendering: modern, colored, light, TOC on the side
- granularity: good
- link to CLHS: yes
- totally automatic: no (one needs to create the documentation structure in `manual.lisp`, AFAIU).
- used in the wild: yes

Getting started: write a simple `docs/manifest.lisp` and `docs/manual.lisp`.

Am I mistaking ? It's exclusively manual. We must supply every
function/generic function/method/class/macro to document in
`manual.lisp`.


## Coo

Coo is a new tool in town, it works out of the box and it is actively developed !

- https://github.com/fisxoj/coo
- https://fisxoj.github.io/coo/
- input: docstrings in `rst`
- output: multiple html
- rendering: black & white, no TOC (active development)
- links to CLHS: yes, since yesterday :)
- granularity: doesn't show class slots, doesn't show generic functions.
- used in the wild: coo no, more probably cl-docutils.

Based on [cl-docutils](https://github.com/willijar/cl-docutils).

Displays the functions' documentation following their order in source (or not ? I saw exceptions).

It's straightforward:

    (coo:document-system :my-system)

and it produces html into `docs/`.


## Staple (doesn't work on Debian's SBCL 1.2.4)

You may be familiar with Staple since it's used by Shinmera in all his projects.

- https://github.com/Shinmera/staple
- output: html. The documentation string is plain text (no markup, rendered in a `<pre>` tag).
- cross-references
- can use a template.
- more features than listed here.

It doesn't support SBCL 1.2.4, so my tests fell short (upgrading isn't
100% smooth here). If you're on SBCL >= 1.4.8 Staple is a good option.

## Declt

Declt has higher goals than "quick and easy" documentation generator.

- https://github.com/didierverna/declt
- https://www.lrde.epita.fr/~didier/software/lisp/declt/
- output: a `.texi` file, that we can render into other formats (html, pdf).
- cross-references: yes

It didn't work out of the box (and had no explicit error information)
and it's also too involved for my use case.

## Documentation-tool (not for general use)

It's the template used for Edi Weitz software, like Hunchentoot.

- https://edicl.github.io/documentation-template/
- output: one html file

It works, but it thinks you publish an edicl software and has some hardcoded "http://weitz.de/files/…" urls.


## Tinaa (unmaintained)

I liked the output, but it didn't work (asdf-related error), and it's unmaintained (authors' words).

- https://github.com/gwkkwg/tinaa
- https://common-lisp.net/project/tinaa/documentation/index.html
- output: html


## See also

### cl-domain (Sphinx)

Another excellent option is 40ants' cldomain, which builds on Python's proven Sphinx:

> CLDomain is an extension for the Sphinx documentation generation tool that allow sphinx to generate documentation for Common Lisp libraries. Documentation is extracted from the various entity’s documentation strings, loaded from ASDF systems and associated internal packages.

They use it for they new projects since around 3 years now.

- https://github.com/40ants/cldomain
- http://40ants.com/cldomain/
- input: rst
- output: many html
- HyperSpec links: yes
- requirements: Python, pip


---

I'll use and watch Coo !
