content/web-dev.md, before:

+++
date = "2017-02-05T07:51:49+01:00"
title = "State of Common Lisp Web Development - an overview"
draft = false
+++

¡ THIS IS A DRAFT !

First, see the
[Awesome CL list](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#network-and-internet).

See also the [Cookbook's issue](https://github.com/LispCookbook/cl-cookbook/issues/105).

Information is at the moment scarce and spread appart, Lisp web
frameworks and libraries evolve and take different approaches.

I'd like to know what's possible, what's lacking, see how to
quickstart everything, see code snippets and, most of all, see how to
do things that I couldn't do before such as hot reloading, building
self-contained executables, shipping a multiplatform web app.

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-generate-toc again -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Web frameworks](#web-frameworks)
    - [URL routing](#url-routing)
        - [Accessing parameters](#accessing-parameters)
    - [Data storage](#data-storage)
        - [Migrations](#migrations)
    - [Debugging](#debugging)
    - [Tests](#tests)
- [Template engines](#template-engines)
    - [HTML-based](#html-based)
    - [Lisp-based](#lisp-based)
- [Javascript](#javascript)
    - [The case Weblbocks - Reblocks, 2017](#the-case-weblbocks---reblocks-2017)
- [Shipping](#shipping)
    - [Building](#building)
    - [Multiplatform delivery with Electron (Ceramic)](#multiplatform-delivery-with-electron-ceramic)
- [Deployment](#deployment)
    - [Running the app on a web server](#running-the-app-on-a-web-server)
        - [Manually](#manually)
        - [with [Clack](http://quickdocs.org/clack/)](#with-clackhttpquickdocsorgclack)
        - [with Docker](#with-docker)
        - [Debugging SBCL error: ensure_space: failed to allocate n bytes](#debugging-sbcl-error-ensurespace-failed-to-allocate-n-bytes)
    - [Connecting to a remote Swank server](#connecting-to-a-remote-swank-server)
    - [Hot reload](#hot-reload)
- [Appendice I: Example websites built with Lisp:](#appendice-i-example-websites-built-with-lisp)
- [Appendice II: Example software](#appendice-ii-example-software)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

# Web frameworks

## Servers - Hunchentoot, Clack

## Websockets

## URL routing

### Accessing parameters

[Lucerne](http://borretti.me/lucerne/docs/overview.html) has a nice
`with-params` macro that makes accessing post or url query parameters a breeze:

~~~lisp
@route app (:post "/tweet")
(defview tweet ()
  (if (lucerne-auth:logged-in-p)
      (let ((user (current-user)))
        (with-params (tweet)
          (utweet.models:tweet user tweet))
        (redirect "/"))
      (render-template (+index+)
                       :error "You are not logged in.")))
~~~

---

[Snooze](https://github.com/joaotavora/snooze)'s way is simple and
lispy: we define routes like methods and parameters as keys:

~~~lisp
(defroute lispdoc (:get :text/* name &key (package :cl) (doctype 'function))
   ...
~~~

matches `/lispdoc`, `/lispdoc/foo` and `/lispdoc/foo?package=arg`.

---

On the contrary, I find Caveman's and Ningle's ways cumbersome.

Ningle:

~~~lisp
(setf (ningle:route *app* "/hello/:name")
      #'(lambda (params)
          (format nil "Hello, ~A" (cdr (assoc "name" params :test #'string=)))))
~~~

> The above controller will be invoked when you access to "/hello/Eitaro" or "/hello/Tomohiro", and then (cdr (assoc "name" params :test #'string=)) will be "Eitaro" and "Tomohiro".

and it doesn't say about query parameters. I had to [ask](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43778570/how-to-get-url-query-parameters-in-clack-lucerne-or-caveman):

~~~lisp
(assoc "the-query-param" (clack.request:query-parameter lucerne:*request*) :test 'string=)
~~~

Caveman:

> Parameter keys contain square brackets ("[" & "]") will be parsed as structured parameters. You can access the parsed parameters as _parsed in routers.

~~~lisp
(defroute "/edit" (&key _parsed)
  (format nil "~S" (cdr (assoc "person" _parsed :test #'string=))))
;=> "((\"name\" . \"Eitaro\") (\"email\" . \"e.arrows@gmail.com\") (\"birth\" . ((\"year\" . 2000) (\"month\" . 1) (\"day\" . 1))))"
~~~


## Session an cookies

## Data storage

### SQL

[Mito](https://github.com/fukamachi/mito) works for MySQL, Postgres
and SQLite3 on SBCL and CCL.

We can define models with a regular class which has a `mito:dao-table-class` `:metaclass`:

~~~lisp
(defclass user ()
  ((name :col-type (:varchar 64)
         :initarg :name
         :accessor user-name)
   (email :col-type (:varchar 128)
          :initarg :email
          :accessor user-email))
  (:metaclass mito:dao-table-class)
  (:unique-keys email))
~~~

We create the table with `ensure-table-exists`:

~~~lisp
(ensure-table-exists 'user)
;-> ;; CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "user" (
;       "id" BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
;       "name" VARCHAR(64) NOT NULL,
;       "email" VARCHAR(128),
;       "created_at" TIMESTAMP,
;       "updated_at" TIMESTAMP
;   ) () [0 rows] | MITO.DAO:ENSURE-TABLE-EXISTS
~~~


### Persistent datastores

### Migrations

[Mito](https://github.com/fukamachi/mito) has migrations support and
DB schema versioning for MySQL, Postgres and SQLite3, on SBCL and
CCL. Once we have changed our model definition, we have commands to
see the generated SQL and to apply the migration.


We inspect the SQL: (suppose we just added the email field into the `user` class above)

~~~lisp
(mito:migration-expressions 'user)
;=> (#<SXQL-STATEMENT: ALTER TABLE user ALTER COLUMN email TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN email SET NOT NULL>
;    #<SXQL-STATEMENT: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_user_email ON user (email)>)
~~~

and we can apply the migration:

~~~lisp
(mito:migrate-table 'user)
;-> ;; ALTER TABLE "user" ALTER COLUMN "email" TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN "email" SET NOT NULL () [0 rows] | MITO.MIGRATION.TABLE:MIGRATE-TABLE
;   ;; CREATE UNIQUE INDEX "unique_user_email" ON "user" ("email") () [0 rows] | MITO.MIGRATION.TABLE:MIGRATE-TABLE
;-> (#<SXQL-STATEMENT: ALTER TABLE user ALTER COLUMN email TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN email SET NOT NULL>
;    #<SXQL-STATEMENT: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_user_email ON user (email)>)
~~~


[Crane](https://github.com/eudoxia0/crane) advertises **automatic**
migrations, i.e. it would run them after a `C-c C-c`. Unfortunately Crane has
some issues, it doesn't work with sqlite yet and the author is busy
elsewhere. It didn't work for me at first try.

Let's hope the author comes back to work on this in a near future.


## Forms

### Form validation

## Debugging

On an error we enter the interactive REPL.


[clack-errors](https://github.com/eudoxia0/clack-errors). Like a Flask
or Django stacktrace in the browser.

> By default, when Clack throws an exception when rendering a page, the server waits for the response until it times out while the exception waits in the REPL. This isn't very useful. So now there's this.

It prints the stacktrace along with some request details on the
browser. Can return a custom error page in production.

<img src="https://camo.githubusercontent.com/17dd6e0a7a916c8118f0134a94404f6757bee9dc/68747470733a2f2f7261772e6769746875622e636f6d2f6575646f786961302f636c61636b2d6572726f72732f6d61737465722f73637265656e73686f742d6465762e706e67" width="800px"></img>


[clack-pretend](https://github.com/BnMcGn/clack-pretend)

> Are you tired of jumping to your web browser every time you need to test your work in Clack? Clack-pretend will capture and replay calls to your clack middleware stack. When developing a web application with clack, you will often find it inconvenient to run your code from the lisp REPL because it expects a clack environment, including perhaps, cookies or a logged-in user. With clack-pretend, you can run prior web requests from your REPL, moving development back where it belongs.


## Tests

Testing with a local DB.

We would use [envy](https://github.com/fukamachi/envy) to switch configurations.


## Misc

###  Oauth, Job queues, etc

# Template engines

## HTML-based

**[Djula](https://mmontone.github.io/djula/)**: as Django
templates. Good documentation. Comes by default in Lucerne and Caveman.

We also use a dot to access attributes of dict-like variables (plists,
alists, hash-tables, arrays and CLOS objects), such a feature being
backed by the [access](https://github.com/AccelerationNet/access)
library.

We wanted once to use structs and didn't find how to it directly in
Djula, so we resorted in a quick helper function to transform the
struct in an alist.

**[Eco](https://github.com/eudoxia0/eco)** - a mix of html with lisp expressions.

Truncated example:

~~~
<body>
      <% if posts %>
        <h1>Recent Posts</h1>
        <ul id="post-list">
          <% loop for (title . snippet) in posts %>
            <li><%= title %> - <%= snippet %></li>
          <% end %>
        </ul>
        ...
~~~

## Lisp-based

I prefer the semantics of
[Spinneret](https://github.com/ruricolist/spinneret) over cl-who. It
also has more features (like embeddable markdown, warns on malformed html, and more).

# Javascript

## Ajax

## The case Weblbocks - Reblocks, 2017

Backend and interactive client in Lisp. In development but simple new quickstart:

http://40ants.com/weblocks/quickstart.html

# Shipping

## Building

We can build an executable also for web apps. That makes for a simple deployment process.

This is the general way:

~~~lisp
(sb-ext:save-lisp-and-die #p"name-of-executable" :toplevel #'main :executable t)
~~~

we need a step more for web apps:

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
    (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                              (sb-thread:list-all-threads))))
~~~

One more gotcha, illustrated with `lparallel`. The lisp doesn't want
to see running threads while building the executable. So if you use
`lparallel`, and thus need to instantiate its kernels, also do it
inside the main function.

So, I use the following pattern:

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
  (setf lparallel:*kernel* (lparallel:make-kernel 2))
  (start-app :port 9003)
  (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                    (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                                  (sb-thread:list-all-threads))))
~~~

I can now build my web app, send it to my VPS and see it live.

When I run it, Hunchentoot stays listening at the foreground:

```
$ ./my-webapp
Hunchentoot server is started.
Listening on localhost:9003.
```

On my VPS, I need to put it in the background (`C-z bg`), or use a `tmux` session
(`tmux`, then `C-b d` to detach it).

To be complete, you'll notice that we can not `C-c` our running app,
we get trapped into the debugger (which responds only to `C-z` and
`kill`). As with any command line, we have to catch the corresponding
signal. We also `stop` our app. See
[our cl-torrents tutorial](https://vindarel.github.io/cl-torrents/tutorial.html#org8567d07)
on how to build command-line applications.

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
  (start-app :port 9003)
  (handler-case (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                                  (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                                                (sb-thread:list-all-threads)))
    (#+sbcl sb-sys:interactive-interrupt
      #+ccl  ccl:interrupt-signal-condition
      #+clisp system::simple-interrupt-condition
      #+ecl ext:interactive-interrupt
      #+allegro excl:interrupt-signal
      () (progn
           (format *error-output* "Aborting.~&")
           (clack:stop *server*)
           (sb-ext:exit :code 1)) ;; libs like unix-opts have portable exit functions.
    ;; for others, unhandled errors (we might want to do the same).
    (error (c) (format t "Woops, an unknown error occured:~&~a~&" c))))
~~~


See also how to daemonize an application (below in Deployment).


To see:

- a Debian package for every Quicklisp system: [http://margaine.com/2015/12/22/quicklisp-packagecloud-debian-packages.html](http://margaine.com/2015/12/22/quicklisp-packagecloud-debian-packages.html).


## Multiplatform delivery with Electron (Ceramic)

[Ceramic](https://ceramic.github.io/) makes all the work for us.

It is as simple as this:

~~~lisp
;; Load Ceramic and our app
(ql:quickload '(:ceramic :our-app))

;; Ensure Ceramic is set up
(ceramic:setup)
(ceramic:interactive)

;; Start our app (here based on the Lucerne framework)
(lucerne:start our-app.views:app :port 8000)

;; Open a browser window to it
(defvar window (ceramic:make-window :url "http://localhost:8000/"))

;; start Ceramic
(ceramic:show-window window)
~~~

and we can ship this on Linux, Mac and Windows.

More:

> Ceramic applications are compiled down to native code, ensuring both performance and enabling you to deliver closed-source, commercial applications.

(so no need to minify our JS)

with one more line:

~~~lisp
(ceramic.bundler:bundle :ceramic-hello-world
                                 :bundle-pathname #p"/home/me/app.tar")
Copying resources...
Compiling app...
Compressing...
Done!
#P"/home/me/app.tar"
~~~

This last line was buggy for us.

# Deployment

## Running the app on a web server

### Manually

    sbcl --load <my-app> --eval (start-my-app)

For example, a `run` Makefile target:

```
run:
	sbcl --load my-app.asd \
	     --eval '(ql:quickload :my-app)' \
	     --eval '(my-app:start-app)'  ;; given this function starts clack or hunchentoot.
```

this keeps sbcl in the foreground. Can use `tmux` or just `C-z bg` to put it in background.

Then, we need of a task supervisor, that will restart our app on failures, start it after a reboot, handle logging. See the section below and example projects (such as Quickutil).


### with [Clack](http://quickdocs.org/clack/)

```
$ clackup app.lisp
Hunchentoot server is started.
Listening on localhost:5000.
```

### with Docker

So we have various implementations ready to use: sbcl, ecl, ccl… with Quicklisp well configured.

https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/testing.html#gitlab-ci


### Daemonizing, restarting in case of crashes, handling logs

See how to do that on your system.

Most GNU/Linux distros now come with Systemd.

Examples [search](https://lmddgtfy.net/?q=systemd%20daemonize%20application) result:

- https://seanmcgary.com/posts/deploying-nodejs-applications-with-systemd/

It is as simple as writing a configuration file:

```
# /etc/systemd/system/my-app.service
[Unit]
Description=stupid simple example

[Service]
WorkingDirectory=/path/to/your/app
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/sthg sthg
Type=simple
Restart=always
RestartSec=10
```

running a command to start it:

    sudo systemctl start my-app.service

a command to check its status:

    systemctl status my-app.service


and Systemd can handle **logging** (we write to stdout or stderr, it writes logs):

    journalctl -f -u my-app.service


and it handles crashes and **restarts the app**:

    Restart=always

and it can **start the app after a reboot**:

    [Install]
    WantedBy=basic.target

to enable it:

    sudo systemctl enable my-app.service


### Debugging SBCL error: ensure_space: failed to allocate n bytes

If you get this error with SBCL on your server:

```
mmap: wanted 1040384 bytes at 0x20000000, actually mapped at 0x715fa2145000
ensure_space: failed to allocate 1040384 bytes at 0x20000000
(hint: Try "ulimit -a"; maybe you should increase memory limits.)
```

then disable [ASLR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_space_layout_randomization):

    sudo bash -c "echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space"

## Connecting to a remote Swank server

Little example here: [http://cvberry.com/tech_writings/howtos/remotely_modifying_a_running_program_using_swank.html](http://cvberry.com/tech_writings/howtos/remotely_modifying_a_running_program_using_swank.html).

It defines a simple function that prints forever:


~~~lisp
;; a little common lisp swank demo
;; while this program is running, you can connect to it from another terminal or machine
;; and change the definition of doprint to print something else out!
;; (ql:quickload :swank)
;; (ql:quickload :bordeaux-threads)

(require :swank)
(require :bordeaux-threads)

(defparameter *counter* 0)

(defun dostuff ()
  (format t "hello world ~a!~%" *counter*))

(defun runner ()
  (bt:make-thread (lambda ()
                    (swank:create-server :port 4006)))
  (format t "we are past go!~%")
  (loop while t do
       (sleep 5)
       (dostuff)
       (incf *counter*)
       ))

(runner)
~~~

On our server, we run it with

    sbcl --load demo.lisp

we do port forwarding on our development machine:

    ssh -L4006:127.0.0.1:4006 username@example.com

this will securely forward port 4006 on the server at example.com to
our local computer's port 4006 (swanks accepts connections from
localhost).

We connect to the running swank with `M-x slime-connect`, typing in
port 4006.

We can write new code:

~~~lisp
(defun dostuff ()
  (format t "goodbye world ~a!~%" *counter*))
(setf *counter* 0)
~~~

and eval it as usual with `M-x slime-eval-region` for instance. The output should change.

There are more pointers on CV Berry's page.


## Hot reload

Example with [Quickutil](https://github.com/tarballs-are-good/quickutil/blob/master/quickutil-server/).

It has a Makefile target:

```lisp
hot_deploy:
	$(call $(LISP), \
		(ql:quickload :quickutil-server) (ql:quickload :swank-client), \
		(swank-client:with-slime-connection (conn "localhost" $(SWANK_PORT)) \
			(swank-client:slime-eval (quote (handler-bind ((error (function continue))) \
				(ql:quickload :quickutil-utilities) (ql:quickload :quickutil-server) \
				(funcall (symbol-function (intern "STOP" :quickutil-server))) \
				(funcall (symbol-function (intern "START" :quickutil-server)) $(start_args)))) conn)) \
		$($(LISP)-quit))
```

It has to be run on the server (a simple fabfile command can call this
through ssh). Beforehand, a `fab update` has run `git pull` on the
server, so new code is present but not running. It connects to the
local swank server, loads the new code, stops and starts the app in a
row.


# Appendice I: Example websites built with Lisp:

* [Quickdocs-server](https://github.com/quickdocs/quickdocs-server) - Caveman, Djula templates, Datafly and Sxql, Envy configuration switcher, Qlot, a simple fabfile for deployment.
* [Quickutil](https://github.com/tarballs-are-good/quickutil/blob/master/quickutil-server/) -
  ningle, closure-template, jquery and pjax, hot deploy with
  connection to a swank server, a fabfile, nginx, supervisor, watchdog
  autoreload.

# Appendice II: Example software

See also Potato, Turtl and others in the Software section.

Commit message:

handling errors in Snooze, mention Radiance

content/web-dev.md, after:

+++
date = "2017-02-05T07:51:49+01:00"
title = "State of Common Lisp Web Development - an overview"
draft = false
+++

¡ THIS IS A DRAFT !

First, see the
[Awesome CL list](https://github.com/CodyReichert/awesome-cl#network-and-internet).

See also the [Cookbook's issue](https://github.com/LispCookbook/cl-cookbook/issues/105).

Information is at the moment scarce and spread appart, Lisp web
frameworks and libraries evolve and take different approaches.

I'd like to know what's possible, what's lacking, see how to
quickstart everything, see code snippets and, most of all, see how to
do things that I couldn't do before such as hot reloading, building
self-contained executables, shipping a multiplatform web app.

<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-generate-toc again -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Web frameworks](#web-frameworks)
    - [URL routing](#url-routing)
        - [Accessing parameters](#accessing-parameters)
    - [Data storage](#data-storage)
        - [Migrations](#migrations)
    - [Debugging](#debugging)
    - [Tests](#tests)
- [Template engines](#template-engines)
    - [HTML-based](#html-based)
    - [Lisp-based](#lisp-based)
- [Javascript](#javascript)
    - [The case Weblbocks - Reblocks, 2017](#the-case-weblbocks---reblocks-2017)
- [Shipping](#shipping)
    - [Building](#building)
    - [Multiplatform delivery with Electron (Ceramic)](#multiplatform-delivery-with-electron-ceramic)
- [Deployment](#deployment)
    - [Running the app on a web server](#running-the-app-on-a-web-server)
        - [Manually](#manually)
        - [with [Clack](http://quickdocs.org/clack/)](#with-clackhttpquickdocsorgclack)
        - [with Docker](#with-docker)
        - [Debugging SBCL error: ensure_space: failed to allocate n bytes](#debugging-sbcl-error-ensurespace-failed-to-allocate-n-bytes)
    - [Connecting to a remote Swank server](#connecting-to-a-remote-swank-server)
    - [Hot reload](#hot-reload)
- [Appendice I: Example websites built with Lisp:](#appendice-i-example-websites-built-with-lisp)
- [Appendice II: Example software](#appendice-ii-example-software)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

# Web frameworks

[Radiance](https://github.com/Shirakumo/radiance), with extensive tutorial and existing apps.

## Servers - Hunchentoot, Clack

## Websockets

## URL routing

### Accessing parameters

[Lucerne](http://borretti.me/lucerne/docs/overview.html) has a nice
`with-params` macro that makes accessing post or url query parameters a breeze:

~~~lisp
@route app (:post "/tweet")
(defview tweet ()
  (if (lucerne-auth:logged-in-p)
      (let ((user (current-user)))
        (with-params (tweet)
          (utweet.models:tweet user tweet))
        (redirect "/"))
      (render-template (+index+)
                       :error "You are not logged in.")))
~~~

---

[Snooze](https://github.com/joaotavora/snooze)'s way is simple and
lispy: we define routes like methods and parameters as keys:

~~~lisp
(defroute lispdoc (:get :text/* name &key (package :cl) (doctype 'function))
   ...
~~~

matches `/lispdoc`, `/lispdoc/foo` and `/lispdoc/foo?package=arg`.

---

On the contrary, I find Caveman's and Ningle's ways cumbersome.

Ningle:

~~~lisp
(setf (ningle:route *app* "/hello/:name")
      #'(lambda (params)
          (format nil "Hello, ~A" (cdr (assoc "name" params :test #'string=)))))
~~~

> The above controller will be invoked when you access to "/hello/Eitaro" or "/hello/Tomohiro", and then (cdr (assoc "name" params :test #'string=)) will be "Eitaro" and "Tomohiro".

and it doesn't say about query parameters. I had to [ask](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43778570/how-to-get-url-query-parameters-in-clack-lucerne-or-caveman):

~~~lisp
(assoc "the-query-param" (clack.request:query-parameter lucerne:*request*) :test 'string=)
~~~

Caveman:

> Parameter keys contain square brackets ("[" & "]") will be parsed as structured parameters. You can access the parsed parameters as _parsed in routers.

~~~lisp
(defroute "/edit" (&key _parsed)
  (format nil "~S" (cdr (assoc "person" _parsed :test #'string=))))
;=> "((\"name\" . \"Eitaro\") (\"email\" . \"e.arrows@gmail.com\") (\"birth\" . ((\"year\" . 2000) (\"month\" . 1) (\"day\" . 1))))"
~~~


## Session an cookies

## Data storage

### SQL

[Mito](https://github.com/fukamachi/mito) works for MySQL, Postgres
and SQLite3 on SBCL and CCL.

We can define models with a regular class which has a `mito:dao-table-class` `:metaclass`:

~~~lisp
(defclass user ()
  ((name :col-type (:varchar 64)
         :initarg :name
         :accessor user-name)
   (email :col-type (:varchar 128)
          :initarg :email
          :accessor user-email))
  (:metaclass mito:dao-table-class)
  (:unique-keys email))
~~~

We create the table with `ensure-table-exists`:

~~~lisp
(ensure-table-exists 'user)
;-> ;; CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "user" (
;       "id" BIGSERIAL NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
;       "name" VARCHAR(64) NOT NULL,
;       "email" VARCHAR(128),
;       "created_at" TIMESTAMP,
;       "updated_at" TIMESTAMP
;   ) () [0 rows] | MITO.DAO:ENSURE-TABLE-EXISTS
~~~


### Persistent datastores

### Migrations

[Mito](https://github.com/fukamachi/mito) has migrations support and
DB schema versioning for MySQL, Postgres and SQLite3, on SBCL and
CCL. Once we have changed our model definition, we have commands to
see the generated SQL and to apply the migration.


We inspect the SQL: (suppose we just added the email field into the `user` class above)

~~~lisp
(mito:migration-expressions 'user)
;=> (#<SXQL-STATEMENT: ALTER TABLE user ALTER COLUMN email TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN email SET NOT NULL>
;    #<SXQL-STATEMENT: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_user_email ON user (email)>)
~~~

and we can apply the migration:

~~~lisp
(mito:migrate-table 'user)
;-> ;; ALTER TABLE "user" ALTER COLUMN "email" TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN "email" SET NOT NULL () [0 rows] | MITO.MIGRATION.TABLE:MIGRATE-TABLE
;   ;; CREATE UNIQUE INDEX "unique_user_email" ON "user" ("email") () [0 rows] | MITO.MIGRATION.TABLE:MIGRATE-TABLE
;-> (#<SXQL-STATEMENT: ALTER TABLE user ALTER COLUMN email TYPE character varying(128), ALTER COLUMN email SET NOT NULL>
;    #<SXQL-STATEMENT: CREATE UNIQUE INDEX unique_user_email ON user (email)>)
~~~


[Crane](https://github.com/eudoxia0/crane) advertises **automatic**
migrations, i.e. it would run them after a `C-c C-c`. Unfortunately Crane has
some issues, it doesn't work with sqlite yet and the author is busy
elsewhere. It didn't work for me at first try.

Let's hope the author comes back to work on this in a near future.


## Forms

### Form validation

## Debugging

On an error we are usually dropped into the interactive debugger by default.

Snooze gives options:

* use the debugger,
* print the stacktrace in the browser (like clack-errors below, but built-in),
* display a custom 404.


[clack-errors](https://github.com/eudoxia0/clack-errors). Like a Flask
or Django stacktrace in the browser. For Caveman, Ningle and family.

> By default, when Clack throws an exception when rendering a page, the server waits for the response until it times out while the exception waits in the REPL. This isn't very useful. So now there's this.

It prints the stacktrace along with some request details on the
browser. Can return a custom error page in production.

<img src="https://camo.githubusercontent.com/17dd6e0a7a916c8118f0134a94404f6757bee9dc/68747470733a2f2f7261772e6769746875622e636f6d2f6575646f786961302f636c61636b2d6572726f72732f6d61737465722f73637265656e73686f742d6465762e706e67" width="800px"></img>


[clack-pretend](https://github.com/BnMcGn/clack-pretend)

> Are you tired of jumping to your web browser every time you need to test your work in Clack? Clack-pretend will capture and replay calls to your clack middleware stack. When developing a web application with clack, you will often find it inconvenient to run your code from the lisp REPL because it expects a clack environment, including perhaps, cookies or a logged-in user. With clack-pretend, you can run prior web requests from your REPL, moving development back where it belongs.


## Tests

Testing with a local DB: what's involved ?

We would use [envy](https://github.com/fukamachi/envy) to switch configurations.


## Misc

###  Oauth, Job queues, etc

# Template engines

## HTML-based

**[Djula](https://mmontone.github.io/djula/)**: as Django
templates. Good documentation. Comes by default in Lucerne and Caveman.

We also use a dot to access attributes of dict-like variables (plists,
alists, hash-tables, arrays and CLOS objects), such a feature being
backed by the [access](https://github.com/AccelerationNet/access)
library.

We wanted once to use structs and didn't find how to it directly in
Djula, so we resorted in a quick helper function to transform the
struct in an alist.

**[Eco](https://github.com/eudoxia0/eco)** - a mix of html with lisp expressions.

Truncated example:

~~~
<body>
      <% if posts %>
        <h1>Recent Posts</h1>
        <ul id="post-list">
          <% loop for (title . snippet) in posts %>
            <li><%= title %> - <%= snippet %></li>
          <% end %>
        </ul>
        ...
~~~

## Lisp-based

I prefer the semantics of
[Spinneret](https://github.com/ruricolist/spinneret) over cl-who. It
also has more features (like embeddable markdown, warns on malformed html, and more).

# Javascript

## Ajax

## The case Weblbocks - Reblocks, 2017

Backend and interactive client in Lisp. In development but simple new quickstart:

http://40ants.com/weblocks/quickstart.html

# Shipping

## Building

We can build an executable also for web apps. That makes for a simple deployment process.

This is the general way:

~~~lisp
(sb-ext:save-lisp-and-die #p"name-of-executable" :toplevel #'main :executable t)
~~~

we need a step more for web apps:

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
    (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                              (sb-thread:list-all-threads))))
~~~

One more gotcha, illustrated with `lparallel`. The lisp doesn't want
to see running threads while building the executable. So if you use
`lparallel`, and thus need to instantiate its kernels, also do it
inside the main function.

So, I use the following pattern:

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
  (setf lparallel:*kernel* (lparallel:make-kernel 2))
  (start-app :port 9003)
  (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                    (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                                  (sb-thread:list-all-threads))))
~~~

I can now build my web app, send it to my VPS and see it live.

When I run it, Hunchentoot stays listening at the foreground:

```
$ ./my-webapp
Hunchentoot server is started.
Listening on localhost:9003.
```

On my VPS, I need to put it in the background (`C-z bg`), or use a `tmux` session
(`tmux`, then `C-b d` to detach it).

To be complete, you'll notice that we can not `C-c` our running app,
we get trapped into the debugger (which responds only to `C-z` and
`kill`). As with any command line, we have to catch the corresponding
signal. We also `stop` our app. See
[our cl-torrents tutorial](https://vindarel.github.io/cl-torrents/tutorial.html#org8567d07)
on how to build command-line applications.

~~~lisp
(defun main ()
  (start-app :port 9003)
  (handler-case (sb-thread:join-thread (find-if (lambda (th)
                                                  (search "hunchentoot" (sb-thread:thread-name th)))
                                                (sb-thread:list-all-threads)))
    (#+sbcl sb-sys:interactive-interrupt
      #+ccl  ccl:interrupt-signal-condition
      #+clisp system::simple-interrupt-condition
      #+ecl ext:interactive-interrupt
      #+allegro excl:interrupt-signal
      () (progn
           (format *error-output* "Aborting.~&")
           (clack:stop *server*)
           (sb-ext:exit :code 1)) ;; libs like unix-opts have portable exit functions.
    ;; for others, unhandled errors (we might want to do the same).
    (error (c) (format t "Woops, an unknown error occured:~&~a~&" c))))
~~~


See also how to daemonize an application (below in Deployment).


To see:

- a Debian package for every Quicklisp system: [http://margaine.com/2015/12/22/quicklisp-packagecloud-debian-packages.html](http://margaine.com/2015/12/22/quicklisp-packagecloud-debian-packages.html).


## Multiplatform delivery with Electron (Ceramic)

[Ceramic](https://ceramic.github.io/) makes all the work for us.

It is as simple as this:

~~~lisp
;; Load Ceramic and our app
(ql:quickload '(:ceramic :our-app))

;; Ensure Ceramic is set up
(ceramic:setup)
(ceramic:interactive)

;; Start our app (here based on the Lucerne framework)
(lucerne:start our-app.views:app :port 8000)

;; Open a browser window to it
(defvar window (ceramic:make-window :url "http://localhost:8000/"))

;; start Ceramic
(ceramic:show-window window)
~~~

and we can ship this on Linux, Mac and Windows.

More:

> Ceramic applications are compiled down to native code, ensuring both performance and enabling you to deliver closed-source, commercial applications.

(so no need to minify our JS)

with one more line:

~~~lisp
(ceramic.bundler:bundle :ceramic-hello-world
                                 :bundle-pathname #p"/home/me/app.tar")
Copying resources...
Compiling app...
Compressing...
Done!
#P"/home/me/app.tar"
~~~

This last line was buggy for us.

# Deployment

Radiance's tutorial talks about deployment. https://github.com/Shirakumo/radiance-tutorial/blob/master/Part%207.md

## Running the app on a web server

### Manually

    sbcl --load <my-app> --eval (start-my-app)

For example, a `run` Makefile target:

```
run:
	sbcl --load my-app.asd \
	     --eval '(ql:quickload :my-app)' \
	     --eval '(my-app:start-app)'  ;; given this function starts clack or hunchentoot.
```

this keeps sbcl in the foreground. Can use `tmux` or just `C-z bg` to put it in background.

Then, we need of a task supervisor, that will restart our app on failures, start it after a reboot, handle logging. See the section below and example projects (such as Quickutil).


### with [Clack](http://quickdocs.org/clack/)

```
$ clackup app.lisp
Hunchentoot server is started.
Listening on localhost:5000.
```

### with Docker

So we have various implementations ready to use: sbcl, ecl, ccl… with Quicklisp well configured.

https://lispcookbook.github.io/cl-cookbook/testing.html#gitlab-ci


### Daemonizing, restarting in case of crashes, handling logs

See how to do that on your system.

Most GNU/Linux distros now come with Systemd.

Examples [search](https://lmddgtfy.net/?q=systemd%20daemonize%20application) result:

- https://seanmcgary.com/posts/deploying-nodejs-applications-with-systemd/

It is as simple as writing a configuration file:

```
# /etc/systemd/system/my-app.service
[Unit]
Description=stupid simple example

[Service]
WorkingDirectory=/path/to/your/app
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/sthg sthg
Type=simple
Restart=always
RestartSec=10
```

running a command to start it:

    sudo systemctl start my-app.service

a command to check its status:

    systemctl status my-app.service


and Systemd can handle **logging** (we write to stdout or stderr, it writes logs):

    journalctl -f -u my-app.service


and it handles crashes and **restarts the app**:

    Restart=always

and it can **start the app after a reboot**:

    [Install]
    WantedBy=basic.target

to enable it:

    sudo systemctl enable my-app.service


### Debugging SBCL error: ensure_space: failed to allocate n bytes

If you get this error with SBCL on your server:

```
mmap: wanted 1040384 bytes at 0x20000000, actually mapped at 0x715fa2145000
ensure_space: failed to allocate 1040384 bytes at 0x20000000
(hint: Try "ulimit -a"; maybe you should increase memory limits.)
```

then disable [ASLR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_space_layout_randomization):

    sudo bash -c "echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space"

## Connecting to a remote Swank server

Little example here: [http://cvberry.com/tech_writings/howtos/remotely_modifying_a_running_program_using_swank.html](http://cvberry.com/tech_writings/howtos/remotely_modifying_a_running_program_using_swank.html).

It defines a simple function that prints forever:


~~~lisp
;; a little common lisp swank demo
;; while this program is running, you can connect to it from another terminal or machine
;; and change the definition of doprint to print something else out!
;; (ql:quickload :swank)
;; (ql:quickload :bordeaux-threads)

(require :swank)
(require :bordeaux-threads)

(defparameter *counter* 0)

(defun dostuff ()
  (format t "hello world ~a!~%" *counter*))

(defun runner ()
  (bt:make-thread (lambda ()
                    (swank:create-server :port 4006)))
  (format t "we are past go!~%")
  (loop while t do
       (sleep 5)
       (dostuff)
       (incf *counter*)
       ))

(runner)
~~~

On our server, we run it with

    sbcl --load demo.lisp

we do port forwarding on our development machine:

    ssh -L4006:127.0.0.1:4006 username@example.com

this will securely forward port 4006 on the server at example.com to
our local computer's port 4006 (swanks accepts connections from
localhost).

We connect to the running swank with `M-x slime-connect`, typing in
port 4006.

We can write new code:

~~~lisp
(defun dostuff ()
  (format t "goodbye world ~a!~%" *counter*))
(setf *counter* 0)
~~~

and eval it as usual with `M-x slime-eval-region` for instance. The output should change.

There are more pointers on CV Berry's page.


## Hot reload

Example with [Quickutil](https://github.com/tarballs-are-good/quickutil/blob/master/quickutil-server/).

It has a Makefile target:

```lisp
hot_deploy:
	$(call $(LISP), \
		(ql:quickload :quickutil-server) (ql:quickload :swank-client), \
		(swank-client:with-slime-connection (conn "localhost" $(SWANK_PORT)) \
			(swank-client:slime-eval (quote (handler-bind ((error (function continue))) \
				(ql:quickload :quickutil-utilities) (ql:quickload :quickutil-server) \
				(funcall (symbol-function (intern "STOP" :quickutil-server))) \
				(funcall (symbol-function (intern "START" :quickutil-server)) $(start_args)))) conn)) \
		$($(LISP)-quit))
```

It has to be run on the server (a simple fabfile command can call this
through ssh). Beforehand, a `fab update` has run `git pull` on the
server, so new code is present but not running. It connects to the
local swank server, loads the new code, stops and starts the app in a
row.


# Appendice I: Example websites built with Lisp:

* [Quickdocs-server](https://github.com/quickdocs/quickdocs-server) - Caveman, Djula templates, Datafly and Sxql, Envy configuration switcher, Qlot, a simple fabfile for deployment.
* [Quickutil](https://github.com/tarballs-are-good/quickutil/blob/master/quickutil-server/) -
  ningle, closure-template, jquery and pjax, hot deploy with
  connection to a swank server, a fabfile, nginx, supervisor, watchdog
  autoreload.

# Appendice II: Example software

See also Potato, Turtl and others in the Software section.
